---
title: "Automate me: To ubiquity and beyond!"
last_modified_at: 2016-03-09T16:20:02-05:00
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
header:
  image: /assets/images/ubi_header_1.jpg
  caption: "Photo credit: [**Unsplash**](https://unsplash.com/@jesuskiteque)"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Ubiquitous-Computing
  - Automation
  - AutoLife
---
It might have been hard to imagine in 1988 just how pervasive computing would become today, with our myrad of personal smart gadgets and cloud services, but surprisingly, over 30 years before the smart phone Mark Weiser lay forth a computer paradigm called Ubiquitous computing (ubicomp), in this predicted era of calm technology, the computers themself fade unseen into the background. It is a paradigm born from how we design human-computer interfaces (HCI), the data we generate, and the context it provides our computations, it should make the data we would want or require available comfortably, as we move between home, office, hobbies and vacations. 

<!--more-->

First lets discuss the computers as machines, the first wave of computing came with huge mainframes, these behemoths could occupy everything from a room to whole factory floors, they has no operating system (OS) between the hardware and user, the first was usually programmed with punching cards. These machines shrunk, their parts became more robust and less prone to errors, building and maintaining could be done by less people and skill, we entered the second wave of computing, the era of personal computers. While the PC is mostly associated with the Windows OS, what made them personal has never been limited to Windows, or the x86 architecture (the common desktop architecture), the smart phone has become much more successfull as a personal device. 
While a nintendo ds and a phone share many hardware and software functionality, from games to browsing and mail, we would be more naturally inclined to call the phone personal, where the ds is labeled a console, because besides gaming doing any form of everyday computing on a ds is cumbersone, it is specialised device.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/computation-at-work.jpg" alt="a home-assistant dashboard" %}

Without getting too technical on general-purpose computation, even though I recommend to read up on this info, the terminology of everyday computing is used to describe the variety of interactive computer tasks that we undertake in our day to day life; from browsing web content and social media, checking our mail, editing documents and stay in touch, services we expect personal devices to provide general comfort. Specialized computation usually require proprietary hardware, as is evident with the range of different gaming consoles, certain titles are only available on select systems: a playstation game is not expected to run on a xbox. In general we refer to this as a proprietary wall, and it is not just hardware, some professional tools are locked to certain OS, like final cut for macOS, as we get used to a tool or service, we will be more likely to buy our upgraded hardware in the same ecosystem we are familiar with. 

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/ecosystem.jpg" alt="a home-assistant dashboard" caption="A creative workstation and devices in a very propietary homogenous ecosystem." %}

Apple is a great example of a rich ecosystem, they have always had a synergy between their services, so when we choose to "scale out" our ecosystem like bying a smart watch, it would be hard to look past the extensive features that exist between that watch, their phones, tablets, computers and cloud services. And if a user has years of their computer files backed up with time machine (hands down the most robust and easy to use personal backup solution) it is not hard to imagine them continuing to buy machines that support this. On the other hand, using google as a mail provider does not require a device, and offers some nice automations as when a flight booking is recieved, an itinirary is made that keeps all my travel information at hand, calculates estimated prime departure times with traffic in mind, and also keeps me updated on the changes in regulation for my journey. Both the google and apple ecosystems have both mail and map services that are rivaling, the context and functionality they share between them is often very limited, they are not friendly ecosystems, so as end consumers we compromise or create small "hacks" to get our way. Usually these things require more attention by the user than what the merits are worth, if the provider was to change something all our hard work would be lost; so the idea of an umbrella ecosystem that we could tailor to our need, bridging the services and ecosystems we want to use.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/messy.jpg" alt="a home-assistant dashboard" caption="A creative workstation and devices in a very propietary homogenous ecosystem." %}


Another important form of computation in ubicomp, automations forms the background services that run implicitly based on the context we produce. If we choose Google as an email provider, then recieving a booking confirmation on a flight will spur a lot of automations into action, first of all an itinirary is created that has the details on my departure gate, flight number, duration etc. It also calculates estimated travel time to the airport with traffic in mind, and in the pandemic it informes me on any recent changes to rules and regulations for my journey, this is all automated, and provided for by the myriad of services in the "google cloud". This is a very calm interaction with the computation that I could easily have managed by exerting time and attention to manually search and note this information, it works great granted that the booking confirmation is sent to my gmail account. Using another provider may have equally intricate and helpful automations, but I would either have to choose one, or maintain two separate accounts for different usage, the different contextual data cannot be shared, and their ecosystems are "not friendly".

We might argue for many ways to optain new functionality, we could provide feedback, feature requests and fumigate on public forums, but generally there is one things that above all else can move mountains on the free market, our money. When a service is provided at equal or lower costs while providing additional features and leisures, the competiton can either adapt or die out (eg. Netflix vs Blockbuster and cable), this leaves us with two options, choose the one that came "closes" to what we truly wanted, or jump on the open source express.



I like to imagine the open source contributors as people who once though "No way I'm paying for this, I could do better" or "If I want this, I guess I have to do it myself." but unlike entepenours, their results are freely available and the code open for reviews and cirticism. In fact many open source projects make the backbone in how we know computing, from the Unix kernels that started as an open source alternative to microsoft (dot) is now the most used OS kernel, present in both android devices, macOS and on supercomputers. Today many open source services are properly funded through crowd donations and can maintain a steady schedule of bug fixes and feature realeases, and their user interfaces and service quality is on par with even the larger enterprise solutions.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/ha_dash.png" alt="a home-assistant dashboard" caption="Home-Assistant is a popular open source smart home platform that lets us connect multiple ecosystems together, in the dashboard above we see lights of very different manufactureres and interfaces being shown together in a unified interface that would usually be split across different mobile apps." %}

 But unlike most commercial solutions that are just work, open source solutions usually require some configuration; we must provide the computational resource ourselves. Either we provide the physical components like storage and CPU locally (usually a home computer) or remotely, which gives us a choice between leasing space for our physical computer, or lease computation from a commercial cloud.

There is a key distinction to make between using a commercial service from a cloud, and providing that service on an instance leased from the same provider, where the infrastructure is the same is that our service and data is in our control (given proper security like encryption), just not at our physical disposition. This leads to two important questions, when would we want to have it locally hosted, and how does cloud infrastructure affect us.

To help explain this, we could imagine being in charge of setting up an enterprise cloud platform in business or startup, one immidiate question would then be how to assure the digital and intellectual property of the company is safeguarded from data loss or unwanted access, the more sensitive the data we would stand to loose. So sensitive user data, usually the kind found in smart homes, fitness devices and contracts are usually duplicated and access restricted with user privileges and encryption of data and transport channels; which is why home-assistant is usually run locally and not in a cloud anyway. So if our company provides a user with 1TB of data at their disposal, we need to duplicate it to prevent dataloss that means our real storage cost is higher, often closer to doubled. There are tons of things an enterprise solution provide for us, the AutoLife project provides an infrastructure section that provides us with the most common tools that are easy and secure, we could even get them to scale well over distributed solutions, it is recomended for anyone who wants to provide their services robustly.

So to conclude the first post in the automate me series, we should understand how the ubicomp paradigm wants us to provide contextually relevant data and behaviour, and that user attention is a valuable resource. For our everyday computing needs, the personal devices, from mobile to desktop is our preffered intereface, while specialised services are preferred for some mediums like TV for video content. How well our context is utilised is up to our ecosystem, or combination of them that we either bridge manually or extend with open source solutions. The next post looks closer at our personal and other HCI devices, their history and how they have changed together with our computational habits.

If you are interested in getting more hands on to improve your project or get started, go straight to my AutoLife documentation.
