---
title: "Automate me: In a flurry of devices"
last_modified_at: 2016-03-09T16:20:02-05:00
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
header:
  image: /assets/images/ubi_header_2.jpg
  caption: "Photo credit: [**Unsplash**](https://unsplash.com/@ranasawalha)"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Ubiquitous-Computing
  - Automation
  - AutoLife
---
In 2020 every person world wide has on average 6 things connected to the internet, it is truly a flurry of devices and things from fitness trackers to desktop computers. Understanding our habits and computational resource needs can both save us money as well as provide new features, imagine using one cable to turn your phone into a desktop computer, or a tablet that elegantly could double as a laptop, even providing you with end of the line desktop games on the go.
<!--more-->

To understand our computational habits, I'd like to introduce three user groups, and the latter two is an extension of the first.
- Everyday computing: from emails, document collaboration, file management, social platforms and video streaming. 
- Content creation: it could be anything from creative content to coding and usually has two characteristics; discrete workloads and specialized work environments.
- Responsive computing: is the group of users that would need to interact with a remote desktop environment or otherwise, this is the case for VR chats, low latency gaming etc.

All developers, and most creative content creators can avoid the last group, responsiveness below 50ms isn't essential for most uses, on a local area network the difference in latency can be around 10ms, connections from outside would be additionally bottlenecked by upload capacities enforced by your ISP.
{: .notice--info}

At the base of all our computational interactions we have everyday computing, with over x% of the population online on a personal device, we see that this has been growing quickly over the last years, online presence, social media, news and storing our important files are all integer parts of our modern lifestyles, no matter where we are on the planet. Everything from an entrylevel smartphone is enough to provide a comfortable way to digest and interact with the whole world, and with services like linkedin and online banks, it could be considered a base utility. While the smartphone has become the most persvasive personal device, there are a lot of tasks where we prefer the keyboard, mouse and larger screen-realestate provided by desktop environments, editing big excel sheets, writing long documents etc, device segments where we see laptop-tablet hybrids such as the ms surface, or tablet-laptop hybrids such as DeX or iPad OS with the magic keyboard folio indicate that the capabilities of these devices and their OS are converging. It might seem complicated, and an uncertain terrain, but it offers a wide new set off possibilities for end users and businesses alike.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/vr_common.jpg" alt="a home-assistant dashboard" caption="As VR offers higher immersion than on-screen content it provides a novel interface to do a lot of our everyday computing more intuitive, changing the playing field like the smartphone has done." %}

Many phones provide both support for external keyboard and mouse with a monitor and often such an adapter as this, in the case of Samsung DeX we get something a lot closer to our usual desktop experience while still doubling as a phone, you can read more on this post where I compare mobile desktop hybrids and discuss my own choices of devices.
{: .notice--info}

So as we can move further away from classifying devices by their architecture or OS, we rather define them by their HCI such as screen-realestate (a combination of resolution and dimensions), other periphirals (eg touch vs mouse) and sensors as more services become unified through a cloud interface. Resource demanding or centralized tools may be presented in webviews such as the code-server that hosts a full Visual Studio Code IDE as a webview, it is low impact on network bandwidth as only requested files and their changes are sent between the client and server, where it can be compiled and run. It is the same for someone rendering a 3D model, their tablet or phone is suffiecient to present and interact, the selected operations can then be handled remotely to perserve battery life and reduce computation time, as long as the workload is determinate (a set number of instructions to perform) using cloud computing is a viable option and may in fact be economically better.

To give an example I had a phone, tablet, laptop and stationary computer and while this is probably a bit overkill compared to what most people have, they all had a purpose. It started out being just a phone, accompanied with a mid-high range gaming rig, which was more than enough until I startied my degree in computer science and needed something portable with a punch to it and got a macbook pro. This combination held through my studies and into my proffesional carrier as a college lecturer, in subjects such as math and physics, sketching and writing arcane equations on a whiteboard is powerful tool for engagement, and in the pandemic I had to find a substitute and got an ipad with the pen; I quickly fell in love with it as a creative tools for CAD design and circuit design too, and little by little I was using the tablet over the laptop steadily.

As for my noisy stationary computer, it was running more as a server with the occassional gaming session that I preferred to stream to the TV in the livingroom anyway (and could still hear the beast trying to take flight in my home office), and as ever the optimizer I tinkered with cloud gaming and parsec with varying degrees of success. My samsung phone supported DeX, and with one usb-c cable between my phone and monitor the desktop environment shows up, and I have access to the monitor usb-hub that can connect everything from keyboard to external drives, even intuitive keybindings from desktop OS makes the experience intuitive and familiar. Now, with two superflous devices, that also happens to be the two most expensive devices sold I had gained a lot of features like a laptop with cellular and my personal desktop on any monitor anywhere, and best of all, I had liquidated some assets into money to expand my, eh, kingdom of sorts.

While using mobile code editors, and termux on android we have something resembling a unix work environment, iOS has less options as a standalone development device though it is changing. One major downside is that neither of these environments support containerisation like docker, and their code editor environments are not as advanced as we get from VS code with code-server, by hosting our own node we solve both of these issues. It can be a raspberry pi (rpi) 4b or a small instance in the cloud, we will only edit our code in a webview IDE, and if we need more power we can scale up without impacting our poratbility at all as this ensures that our dev environment remains the same accross all devices and we have always have the most recent changes. In cases as training a neural-net we could deploy the task to nodes we rent on a time increment like minutes or hours, so a job that would take 1 node (imagine your desktop) 100 hours, renting a 100 of those, or one just as strong we could do the same work in 1 hour, for some businesses that change in time from requesting an answer until one is presented might be critical; and having to wait 1 hour instead of 100h is nice, if you use your own personal computer it would be unavailbale for other tasks during this time as well. Even for the last user group, as with gamers it might be an economic consideration to go for cloud gaming, given you have decent network bandwidth, apart from owning the games themselves, GeForce now offers free-tier account for sessions up to one hour before being promted to log in again, googles stadia also offers some games on a free-tier given you have appropriate devices otherwise. Their paid subscriptions at the time of writing is about 10-15$ on a monthly basis, and some offer deals for longer subscriptions, assuming an annual fee of 100$ we can expect full hd resolution with graphics on high, getting a high end GPU can land us somewhere between 400-1000$, so for just the GPU to be worth the investment for that lowered latency we would have to keep it 4-10 years, that is not considering the rest of the computer. However when we're talking about cheaper hardware such as a rpi 4b (around 100$ with sd, power supply and cooling) or a low end SBC like intel nuc core i3 (250$ and up depending on ram and storage options) where an cloud instance lease would be about 5-15$ a month we see that hosting it ourselves might even be cheaper.

To conclude the second post on automate me, we have seen that mobile and tablets have become powerful devices that together with cloud platforms have erased a lot of the initial differences between the platforms, desktop hybrid that allows mobile devices to use keyboards and mouse natively in a windowed experience draws us closer to a convergence, where desktops and mobiles are ubiquitous. By understanding our habits and how they interplay with our HCI needs we should be able to reduce the amount of devices we need, this saves us money, space, noise and even opens up to new possibilies. 

In the next section we continue down the ladder to smart devices and the internet of things, and how to use them and much more to create a context for automation and synergy.

When we lease cloud instances we might always want access to the IDE node, so keeping this as small as possible reduces costs when we are editing the code, we would usually create independent instances for running and testing.
{: .notice--info}


