
Another way to understand this shift is by considering two resources:
- screen realestate: the size and resolution of an environment (phone vs laptop)
- user attention: the amount of interactivity required by the user



#### So where are all the computers?



It is not that we use less computational resource, we just interact with it differently, by allowing an email provider  The notion of user attention as a resource is important,

while the desktop segment still has a hold on specialised services gaming and advanced creative tools, the "personal" in PC is dead.

 This boom in power over price and size had an impact in all fields of computing, and now the average person har (()) devices and we have on average (()) IoT devices, this impressive amount of data has the potential to provide unprecedented context. Allowing an email provider to automatically set an itinirary upon recieving a booking confirmation email for a flight, it uses its map service to compute estimated depature times from my home or hotel address seamlessly, freeing the users attention from the need of any device or notebook to stay ahead on their trip. While it is an impressive use of context, other mail providers have equally context aware features, but they differ based on their proprietary ecosystem. Besides automations such as the itinirary example, general computing software and files have historically been incompatible and in constant rivalry, often to the loss of end users (ms office vs apple works?), cloud document suites have long since made that notion obsolete, more recent examples is the IoT and cloud standards. This level of computation reached ubiquity, which is not saying that we comfortably edit excel sheets on our smartwatch, but devices with adequate screen realestate and peripherals (touch is often enough for light editing, keyboard and mouse otherwise) all present the relatively the same features.

In this comparison of units sold in the mobile and desktop market segments between yy we see that the mobile market is far bigger and growing in relative share, while the desktop segment still has a hold on specialised services gaming and advanced creative tools, the "personal" in PC is dead.
We still use just as much computational resource, just "distributed" differently
